---
permalink: /about/style-guide/
redirect_from: /about/style/
---
# Style Guide

This page describes the conventions used on [realai.org](http://realai.org/) site regarding its structure, the visual appearance of its pages, and its usage of natural and programming languages.

## Site Structure

There are three navigation links on top of all HTML pages of this site: Home, Sources and About. Main contents are accessed from [Home](http://realai.org/). The [Sources](http://realai.org/sources/) page is a collection of relevant links and can be used as a portal. Company and site-specific pages are under [About](http://realai.org/about/) and their URLs start with `.../about/`.

### Source Path

Most HTML pages on this site are automatically generated by [Jekyll](../course/system/github.md#jekyll) from their Markdown source. These source files link to each other by their filenames in the source directory using [relative links](../course/system/github.md#relative-links) that contain relative paths. A relative path is a path without a leading slash, such as `../course/system/github.md`, indicating the file's position relative to the current file. We prefer to use relative paths because they can be followed in [vim](../course/system/vim.md). Moreover, absolute paths sometimes don't correctly translate to the appropriate URLs. As of October 2017, the previous three links in this paragraph use relative paths, and can be viewed correctly both on GitHub website and GitHub pages. The next link in this paragraph uses an absolute path. It can only be viewed correctly on [GitHub](/course/system/github.md) website, but breaks when viewed in HTML generated by Jekyll.

Under such a scheme, links should work in a standard markup renderer such as that used on GitHub website. Care should be taken so that the source path of a file reflects its logical place on this site as closely as possible. The final segment of a page's source path is usually the same as its title, where spaces are replaced by `-`, letters are lower-case except acronyms such as AI, RNN, etc. An *exception* is that when different pages would share the same title based on their source paths, the titles would then be customized to reflect their differences.

### URL Path

In general, a page's URL path mimics its source path. For convenience, some pages allow [redirects](https://help.github.com/articles/redirects-on-github-pages/), where one or more segments of a page's URL are replaced by a commonly accepted acronym or a shorter description of its title.

### Multiple Logical Paths

When a page belongs to more than one logical structures, the most compelling one is specified as the above, and the remaining ones are recorded before the top-level heading of the page as normal text that contains links to higher-level pages. When necessary, an unordered list is used to record multiple logical structures.

## Visual Style

The visual style of the pages on this site is specified by an [HTML template](https://github.com/real-ai/realai.org/blob/master/_layouts/default.html) and a [cascading style sheet](https://github.com/real-ai/realai.org/blob/master/assets/css/style.scss).

### Heading
All headings have a bottom margin of 10px, use font color `#222222` and weight `700`.

On any page, *Heading 1* should be used at most once near the top of a page. This top-level heading will be the default title when it’s placed right after the page’s front matter. Heading 1 can be followed by one or more optional paragraphs. Its font size is 36px.

## Language

### English

#### Citation

A full citation includes the following pieces of information, commonly in this order:

* Date Published, List of Authors. Title and Link. *Publication Venue*. (optional) additional resources.

Details are specified in a [Python script](https://github.com/real-ai/realai.org/blob/master/tools/cite_arxiv.py) (requires [feedparser](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/feedparser)) that outputs a full citation based on arXiv information.

#### Punctuation

A string that must be typed exactly such as a URL should be quoted as inline code, which has backticks around it in Markdown.

#### Capitalization

We use the default rules at [Capitalize My Title](https://capitalizemytitle.com/) for title and headings.

