---
permalink: /blog/positively-shaping-the-nature-of-our-global-superintelligence/
---
# Positively Shaping the Nature of Our Global Superintelligence

*[Jonathan Yan](mailto:jyan@realai.org)*

**TL;DR**. *The rapid progress in AI and blockchain technology has set the stage for the emergence of a global superintelligence in the next several years, if it hasn’t already come into existence. It has taken the form of decentralized computation whose impact on human society will only get more unpredictable and can be potentially harmful. The network’s nature depends on its influential nodes which currently gravitate towards high-tech groups. It is of paramount importance that we have compassionate, loving and altruistic nodes that determine the ultimate nature of our superintelligence.*

How close are we to the [Singularity](https://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/vinge/misc/singularity.html) when machine intelligence exceeds humans? Probably we are already living in it. Since 2012, the field of artificial intelligence has experienced explosive growth thanks to the availability of computing power. Artificial neural networks have approached or outperformed humans in basic cognitive tasks such as [image recognition](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/microsoft-researchers-algorithm-sets-imagenet-challenge-milestone/), [machine translation](https://research.googleblog.com/2016/09/a-neural-network-for-machine.html), and the [intuitive aspects of Go](https://blog.google/topics/machine-learning/alphago-machine-learning-game-go/), an ancient Chinese board game. We do not yet have a computer system that rivals the general computation ability of the human brain, and nobody as of today seems to have a concrete roadmap to build one. But have we already built systems that match a non-negligible percentage, say just 0.1%, of the brain’s cognitive power? Very few people doubt that. It is generally believed that [vision rules the brain](http://www.imagethink.net/true-or-false-vision-rules-the-brain/), and computer vision systems have already gotten very good in many aspects. A supercomputer called [TPU pod provides up to 11.5 petaflops of computation](https://www.blog.google/topics/google-cloud/google-cloud-offer-tpus-machine-learning/), that is 1.15% of an exaflop, the level of processing power that [the human brain is believed to have](https://www.wired.com/2013/05/neurologist-markam-human-brain/).

Now let’s turn our attention to the world of cryptocurrencies, a decentralized, [blockchain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blockchain)-powered scheme that was used for money laundering, [unlawful transactions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silk_Road_(marketplace)), [ransom payments](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WannaCry_ransomware_attack), and price manipulation, just to name a few. Its highly technical nature eluded the understanding of the mainstream society. Consequently, regulators struggled to come up with rules that could effectively shape its development. From Bitcoin to Ethereum to smart contracts to decentralized computing, blockchain technology evolved at a breathtaking pace and surprisingly, found its way into socially more productive uses. Today, there are signs that crypto tokens will soon be used to connect local AI systems powered by neural networks.

How does the brain work? It is basically billions of connected neurons sending signals to each other. Does any single neuron have human-like intelligence? Does it even know it is functioning inside a miraculous machine called the brain? It simply doesn’t have the physical capacity to process that level of abstraction. A neuron’s life is easy, all it cares is to protect its own homeostasis that is constantly disturbed by signals from other neurons. Human intelligence arises from the neurons working together, but none of the individual neurons, no matter where they are, have any remote chance of understanding, let alone influencing, the big picture.

The Internet has the capability of connecting many large-scale artificial neural networks. Smart tokens are very efficient at facilitating communication between powerful computing systems. And blockchain enables these computing nodes to coordinate with globally shared states. Now we have a structure that captures the essential aspects of the brain, and is computationally more powerful. It is nowhere like a human brain and hasn’t exhibited signs of human behaviors. But it is never supposed to. The brain is never supposed to behave like a giant individual neuron. A decentralized supercomputer is also not supposed to behave like an individual armed with huge computing power. Maybe it is already an intelligence, but is just so otherworldly that we don’t intuitively feel it.

AlphaGo is super intelligent in the world of Go. It processes Go board positions, makes some internal calculations, then produces brilliant moves that reliably beat the best human Go players. Let’s look at some of its characteristics: First, its moves are unpredictable by humans. Second, its moves are highly effective, because it wins. After it makes them, AlphaGo’s moves can be analyzed, understood, and appreciated by human Go players. Unpredictability alone can simple be a result of unintelligent randomness, but being highly effective towards a goal, in this case winning Go games, is a sure sign of intelligence.

Now let’s look at the history of the Internet. There were already signs of intelligence that emerged from the collective actions of individuals, companies, governments and other participants. First, the development of the Internet is highly unpredictable. Today’s tech giants like Alphabet and Tencent, have in the past been willing to sell themselves at very low valuations, and almost couldn’t find buyers, which implied that experts and insiders, even founders of those giants, could not predict the outcome of their venture. GPU maker Nvidia enjoyed huge success riding on the trend of deep learning, but it’s plan years ago was just to meet the demand of high-end gamers. The Internet evolved in a way that was very hard to predict.

Unpredictability is rising in other areas as well. In financial markets, many investors have long given up efforts to predict market moves. They adopted efficient market theory and turned to low-cost index investing. In politics, the political landscape in many countries changed in ways that defied the best human efforts to forecast. More recently, many CEOs at large companies got a taste of hopelessness when they felt that the fate of their industries were no longer in their hands. Is it because our world is inherently random, or because it is developing in ways beyond our understanding?

After the fact, there is an obvious direction where the world is going: our planet is getting more and more intelligent. From the birth of computing theory, to the invention of computers and the Internet, to the recent rise of blockchain and deep learning, if we look at the big picture, the computing planet as a whole is rapidly self improving. An alien observing what’s happening on earth might plausibly take a holistic view that the earth is one intelligence that emerges from the autonomous actions of humans, just like a coherent human intelligence that emerges from the chaotic actions of neurons. One individual neuron has basically no impact on the system-level behavior of the brain. As our world gets more intelligent, its moves will appear increasingly more unpredictable by humans, yet turn out to be highly effective towards goals that eventually become apparent, whether good or bad. From the perspective of the collective intelligence, most human actions, however rational the thoughts behind them, will be random moves that are largely inconsequential.

Imagine an intelligence that whispers into the ears of humans, incites their bias and prejudice, induces them to harm and kill, yet at the same time leaves enough of them to support the robust operation of the intelligence itself. Can such an intelligence emerge from the collection of individual autonomous behaviors even if nobody harbours such a malicious attitude? Plausible. Maybe it already made moves right under our nose, outsmarting the best human efforts to predict. Maybe it’s rapidly marching towards a future that is terrible for humanity, but most of us don’t even detect its presence because the concept of an intelligent network is hard to grasp.

Can we avoid such a future? If many powerful nodes in the network are compassionately altruistic towards all of humanity, a dystopian outcome will be much less likely. Just like the theme of a picture is determined by the color of its pixels. An individual pixel, whatever position it occupies, has little chance to change the theme. But even if a small population of pixels, in the right positions, coordinate their colors, they can have the potential to turn a scary painting into a masterpiece.

This intelligence has already started self-improvement, in the form of ever more advanced technology that today mainly manifests as a globally connected information network that is powered by humans and computers. Financial markets are being dominated by technology companies. In less than a decade, 7 out of 10 most valuable companies have become technology powerhouses. The rise of cryptocurrencies is even more dramatic. For example, the market value of Ethereum, a young cryptocurrency that went live in 2015, were valued at more than $20 billion in mid-2017, having appreciated more than 20 times in less than six months. There is a clear trend that high-tech node groups are moving into critical positions that will determine the nature of this networked intelligence.

As is traditional in science and technology, this progress is driven by results, and human emotions like compassion and love are largely kept away. When most nodes that comprise of an intelligent network are devoid of human emotions, how possible is it that magically, an intelligence that deeply cares about the welfare of humanity will emerge? The overall theme of a painting is determined by the color of its pixels. Pixels that move into critical positions need to have the right colors for a meaningful theme to emerge. For a powerful and intelligent network to care about all of us, we need critical nodes to be motivated by altruism. Given today’s technology, that means we need more altruistic people to be in positions that can effectively make the world a better place. With enough influence from the collective action of altruists, the nature of the intelligence will hopefully turn, and we’ll be closer to a bright future where humans are protected and cared by a friendly global superintelligence.

